## Table of Content
- [Environment Variables](#environment-variables) 
  * [Comman Environment Variables](#comman-environment-variables) 
  * [Define Environment Variables using `export` cmd](#define-environment-variables-using-`export`-cmd) 


Command Line Fun
=================
Introductory Look to Popular Linux Command Line Program

Environment Variables
---------------------
* When opening a terminal window, new bash process which has it's own Bash Environment Variables are initialised. 
* Environment Variables: Form of Global storage inherited by any application which will run during terminal session

### Comman Environment Variables:

1. PATH : `kali@kali:~$ echo $PATH`
2. USER : `kali@kali:~$ echo $USER`
3. HOME : `kali@kali:~$ echo $HOME`
4. PWD  : `kali@kali:~$ echo $PWD`

### Define Environment Variables using `export` cmd
* Let's say you don't want to type IP address repeatedly then you can export the `$ip` variable & can use it across terminal sessions
```
kali@kali:~$ export $ip=192.168.43.70
kali@kali:~$ ping -c 2 $ip
```

* Variables exported without `export` cmd are only accessible in that current bash session
```
kali@kali:~$ lol="Rasode Mein Kon Tha?"
kali@kali:~$ echo $lol    # We will get value of $lol
kali@kali:~$ bash 
kali@kali:~$ echo $lol    # No Value
kali@kali:~$ exit   
kali@kali:~$ echo $lol    # Again can access value of $lol
```
* **NOTE**: Variables defined using `export` cmd can be accessed using different terminal window

* Viewing Default Kali Linux Environment Variables: `env`

Tab Completion
--------------
* Used in auto text completion. 

Bash History Tricks
-------------------
* We can see previous executed cmds using `history` cmd

* For executing last executed terminal cmd, use `!!` double exclamation mark. 

* Bash terminal history is saved in `.bash_history` file in the user home directory: `tail -n 3 .bash_history`

* Two Common Env Variables: 
1. `$HISTSIZE` : Controls no. Of cmds stored in  memory for current terminal session. 
2. `$HISTFILESIZE` : Controls How many cmds are kept in history file. 

* These 2 env variables can be edited according to are needs. 

Useful Keyboard Keys
--------------------
1. `Up ArrowKey`: Use to select/scroll previous cmds in Upwards direction. 
2. `Down ArrowKey`: Use to select/scroll cmds in Downwards direction. 
3. `CTRL + R`: Reverse I search facility, can search previously executed cmds using Cmd Search Feature. 

Piping and Redirection
----------------------
* Every program executed from terminal has 3 streams connected to it that serves the communication channel to external env. 
1. Standard Input (`STDIN`):  Data fed into the program. 
2. Standard Output (`STDOUT`): Output from the program. (defaults to terminal) 
3. Standard Error (`STDERR`):  Error message. (defaults to terminal) 

### Redirecting to a new file

* Redirecting output to a non existing file will leads to file creation: `kali@kali:~$ echo "Corona Go! Go Corona" > EminemRap.txt`
Typical file reading: `kali@kali:~$ cat EminemRap.txt`

* If file already exist, then that file will be overwritted: `kali@kali:~$ echo "Selfie meinai leli aaj" > EminemRap.txt`

* **Note** : Be very careful while file redirection, there is no undo function. 

### Redirecting to a existing file
* Use `>>` sign to append data to a existing file: `kali@kali:~$ echo "Chura ke dil mera goliya chali" >> EminemRap.txt`

### Redirecting from a file
* Use `<` sign to redirect file data to any utility: `kali@kali:~$ wc -m < EminemRap.txt`
* Above cmd will count total words a file. 

### Redirecting STDERR
* We can redirect standard error of particular command using `2>`: `kali@kali:~$ ls . /test 2>error.txt`
* Example content of error.txt file: `ls: cannot excess './test': No such file or directory`

### Piping
* Redirecting output of one cmd as a input for another cmd: `kali@kali:~$ cat error.txt | wc -m`
* Above cmd will perforn word count of `error.txt` file. 

`kali@kali:~$ cat error.txt | wc -m > count.txt`
`kali@kali:~$ cat count.txt`

Text Searching and Manipulation
-------------------------------
### `grep`
* Searches text file for given regex & outputs any line containing a match to stdout (stdout == usually terminal) 
* Example: `kali@kali:~$ ls -la /usr/bin | grep zip`
* Use `man` cmd to learn more about `grep`

### `sed`
* Powerful stream editor + very complex. It performs text editing in stream of text. 
* Example: `kali@kali:~$ echo "Go Katrina! Go" | sed 's/Katrina/Corona/' `
* Example Output: `Go Corona! Go`

### `cut`
* Used to cut a stdout of one cmd to pieces on the basic of given delimiter, then it also be used to select a particular part of string. 
* Commonly used flags: `-d` for Delimiter & `-f` for Field Selection. 
* Example: `kali@kali:~$ echo rahul, saksham, rohit | cut -d "," -f 2`
* Example Output: `saksham`
* Extracting list of users from etc/passed file: `kali@kali:~$ cut -d ":" -f 1 /etc/passwd `

### `awk`
* Programming language designed for text processing. 
* Typically used for data extraction and reporting tools.
* Only going to scratch the surface. 
* Splitting stdout of one cmd using delimeter, Extracting 1st & 3rd part & then finally printing it: `kali@kali:~$ echo "hello::there::friends" | awk -F "::" '{print $1, $3}' `
* Example Output: `hello, friends`

Editing files from the Command Line
-----------------------------------
### `nano`
* Opening file using `nano`: `nano anyfilename.txt`
* Nano commands menu is located at the bottom. 
* Important Memorable cmds:
       - `CTRL + O` : Write changes to a file.
       - `CTRL + K` : To cut current line. 
       - `CTRL + U` : To uncut a line & paste it at cursor location. 
       - `CTRL + W`: To search within a line. 
       - `CTRL + X` : Use to exit. 

### `vi` 
* Opening file using `vi`: `vi anyfilename.txt`
* Press `i` key to Escape Command Mode & start typing in text file. 
* Press `esc` key in order to return back to Command Mode. 
* Press `dd` to remove the current line. 
* Press `yy` to copy the current line. 
* Press `p` to paste the clipboard context. 
* Press `x` to delete the current character under the cursor. 
* Press `:w` to write current file to disk & remain open in `vi`
* Press `:q!` to quit without writing a file. 
* Press `:wq!` to quickly save the file & quit `vi`

Comparing Files
---------------
### `comm`
* Compares two text file, displaying the line that are unique to each one as well those lines that are common. 
* Example File-A & File-B:
```
kali@kali:~$ cat File-A.txt
192.168.1.1
192.168.1.2
192.168.1.3
192.168.1.4
192.168.1.5
kali@kali:~$ cat File-B.txt
192.168.1.1
192.168.1.3
192.168.1.4
192.168.1.5
192.168.1.6
```

* File Comparison example using `comm`: 
```
kali@kali:~$ comm File-A.txt File-B.txt
                               192.168.1.1
192.168.1.2
                               192.168.1.3
                               192.168.1.4
                               192.168.1.5
              192.168.1.6
```
* `192.168.1.2` is unique to 1st file, thus it is displayed in 1st column. 
* `192.168.1.6` is unique to 2nd file, thus it is displayed in 2nd column. 
* Rest all common IPs/Lines are displayed in the 3rd column. 
* `-1` , `-2` and `-3` flags could be given to `comm` in order to suppress 1st, 2nd or 3rd column, according to our need. For example:
```
kali@kali:~$ comm -12 File-A.txt File-B.txt
192.168.1.1
192.168.1.3
192.168.1.4
192.168.1.5
```

### `diff`
* Compares difference b/w files similar to `comm`, but it is more complex & support many output formats. 
* Two famous Formats: 
1. Context Format: `kali@kali:~$ diff -c File-A.txt File-B.txt`
2. Unified Format: `kali@kali:~$ diff -u File-A.txt File-B.txt`

### `vimdiff`
* It open vim (extended version of vi), with multiple files, one in each window.
* Difference b/w files is highlighted, making it easier to inspect them. 

- Useful shortcuts:
    * Press `CTRL + W + Arrow Key` for switching b/w windows
    * Press `] + C` will jump the cursor to next change in the diff. 
    * `[ + C` will jump it to the previous change. 
    * Press `D + O` will get a change in other window and put it in current window. 
    * Press `D + P` will put the change in other window from the current one. 
    * Press `:q!` for quitting vimdiff (Same shortcuts as vi) 

Managing Processes
------------------
* Linux kernel manages multitasking through the use of process. 
* Kernel maintains info about each processes to help keep things organised.
* Each process is assigned a no. called `process id`

* Linux shell introduces the concept of `jobs` to ease our workflow during terminal session. For ex: `kali@kali:~$ cat errors.txt | wc -m` This whole cmd will be considered as one `job`. 

* `jobs` helps us to suspend or resume the execution of particular cmd. 

### Backgrounding Processes (bg)
* Helps us to make the execution of cmd in background, leaving the shell free for further use.
* `&` sign at the end of a cmd, will put the cmd in bg. 

Ex: `kali@kali:~$ ping -c 400 localhost > ping_result.txt &`

* Stopping the execution of cmd using `CTRL + Z` and then typing `bg` cmd will run the last cmd in background. Ex: `kali@kali:~$ bg`

### Jobs Controls (jobs and fg) 
* `jobs` utility list the jobs that are running in current terminal session. 
* Running `fg %JOBNumber` returns a job in foreground. Example: `fg %1`
* If only one job running in the bg, then typing `fg` without any additional flag will return that single job in the foreground. 

### Process Control (ps and kill) 
* `ps` : Process status, list all the running process in a Linux/Unix system, Swizz army knife for process management. 
* Listing all process with full format listing: `kali@kali:~$ ps -ef` where `-e` & `-f` stands for `select all processes` and `full format listing` respectively. 

* Finding process Id using command name: `kali@kali:~$ ps -fC leafpad`

* Killing process using process id: `kali@kali:~$ kill ProcessID`

* Verifying process termination using `ps`: `kali@kali:~$ ps -fC leafpad`

File and Command Monitoring
---------------------------
### `tail` 
* Monitoring apache logs using tail: `kali@kali:~$ sudo tail -f /var/log/apache2/access.log`
* Extracting last `2` lines from file: `kali@kali:~$ sudo tail -n2  /etc/lsb-release` where `2` is the desired no. of last lines. 

### `watch`
* Used to run designated cmd at regular intervals, by default it runs for every 2 seconds which could be changed using `-nX` flag where `X` is the interval in seconds. 
* Example (This cmd will list logged in users output from the `w` cmd once very 5 seconds) : `kali@kali:~$ watch -n 5 w`

Downloading Files
-----------------
### `wget` 
* Utility to download file from the internet. 
* Example (Downloading file & saving it with different name) : `kali@kali:~$ wget -O lol.txt https://example.com/text file.txt`
* Refer to its docs for more info: `kali@kali:~$ wget --help | less`

### `curl` 
* Use to transfer data to and from a server using a host of protocol.
* Can be used to Download and Upload files & build complex request. 
* Example (Download & save file with different name) : `kali@kali:~$ curl -o lol.txt https://example.com/textfile.txt`
* Very versatile tool, lots of use case scenarios & ample docs are available online. 

### `axel` 
* It is Download accelerator that transfers a file from an FTP or HTTP server through multiple connections. 
* It has vast variety of options. Common option: `kali@kali:~$ axel -a -n 20 -o lol.pdf https://example.com/lol.pdf`
* `-a` : For more concise progress indicator. 
* `-n` : For no. Of multiple connections to use. 
* `-o` : For different output name. 

* Extremely useful for downloading large file. 

Customizing the Bash Environment
--------------------------------
### Bash History Customization
* Whether or not to remove duplicate cmds: `kali@kali:~$ export HISTCONTROL=ignoredups`
* Filtering out basic cmds : `kali@kali:~$ export HISTIGNORE="&:ls:[bf]g:exit:history"`
* For showing TimeFormat in history output cmd: `kali@kali:~$ export HISTTIMEFORMAT="%F %T"`
Other time format can be found in strftime man page: `kali@kali:~$ man strfman`

### Alias
* Defining large cmd to shorter name 
* Example: `kali@kali:~$ alias lsa=ls -la`
* We can see defined alias using `kali@kali:~$ alias` cmd without giving any argument/flag.

### Persistent Bash Customization
* Behavior of interactive shell in bash is determined by system's `/etc/bash.bashrc` file. 
* Editing this `bash.bashrc` bash file, will leads to persistent bash customization. 


